# Announcements

Homework 4 has been assigned for March 24.

Test 2 has ben set for March 31.

# Problem

We have `n` servers and some shared resource they wish to access. The
centralized algorithm is straightforward, but we would prefer a distributed
algorithm. For the most part, we just replicate the centralized version.

# Laport's Algorithm (mutex alg.)

### Requirements

FIFO delivery of packets is required.
No faults within the system.

### Request CS

Send timestamped `request` message to all participants (including self).
Requests are timestamped using Laport's Logical Clock implementation.

### Receive `request`

Put request message in queue and send `ACK` back.

_This queue is ordered by timestamps._

### Process Pi can enter CS if...

+ its own request is at the head of the queue

+ Pi has received an ACK from all other processes

### Release CS

Send `release` message to all.

### Receive `release`

Pop from front of queue and re-evaluate position in queue.

## Performance

The algorithm described above sends `(n-1)*3` messages per CS. This does not
include overhead for operating Lamport's Logical Clock algorithm. Time and
memory requirements aren't as important and are left as an exercise to the
reader. 

## Adding Fault Tolerance

One simple way to detect fault of a process is including a timeout on receiving
an `ACK`. This changes our conditions for entering a critical section (easy).
Once the timeout has expired, the process must alert other participants that
this process has failed. Each process now maintains a data structure
representing the current group members. 

# Ricard and Agrawala's Algorithm

We can improve our algorithm by combining `ACK` and `release` messages into a
single `ok` message. We will continue to use Lamport's clock in order to 'break
the symmetry' of the system. This algorithm does not require FIFO messages, but
does require fault tolerance.The modifications are show below.

### Receive `request`

```
if (wantCS == false || req.ts < this.ts)
	send `ok`
else
	add request to banking queue
```

### Pi can enter CS if...

+ it has received `n-1` `ok` messages

### Release CS

Send `ok` to banking queue and clear the queue

## Observations

We lose the ability to detect faults (we removed the `ACK` message).

# Dining Philosophers Algorithm

We can modify the algorithm once more. Let us change the meaning of `ok` to
mean 'you may enter this time and all other times until I request again'.

Imagine the following scenario:

+ P1 requests CS (sends 4 `request`s, receives 4 `ok`s)

+ P2 requests CS (sends 4 `request`s, receives 4 `ok`s)

+ P1 requests CS (sends 1 `request` to P2, receives 1 `ok`)

This puts a bound on our number of messages (`0 <= messages <= 2*(n-1)`)

### Receive `request`

Assuming the current process also wants to enter the CS. We must decide the
circumstances for sending an `ok` to this new `request`.

## Conflict Graph

A graph with n nodes (processes) where an edge between two nodes defines a
shared resource. This is the generalized form of the situation described above
(i.e. resolving conflicts on resource requests).

## Conflict Resolution Graph

Convert the graph to a directed graph where a directed edge from `u -> v`
implies that u has priority over v.

Assumption: the CRG his acyclic. This removes the possibility of deadlocks.

### Proof

`u` is a source node if it has priority on all its edges. If there is a source
node, there can be no deadlock. Next, we must show that each acyclic graph
contains a source node.

